Add Part 1 of "Conda Is Not PyPI" series (#250)
conda/conda-dot-org: blog/2025-09-25-conda-pypi.mdx

---
title: "Conda ≠ PyPI: Why Conda Is More Than a Package Manager"
slug: "conda-pypi"
authors: [dbast, jezdez]
tags: [conda, packaging, distribution]
description: "Part 1 of the 'Conda Is Not PyPI' series—why conda is a multi-language user-space distribution, not just a Python package manager."
---

*Part 1 of our series “Conda Is Not PyPI: Understanding Conda as a User-Space Distro”.*

<!-- truncate -->

---

When people first encounter conda, the most common misconception is:

> *“Isn’t conda just another Python package manager, like pip?”*

The short answer: **no**.

> Pip (and npm, RubyGems, Cargo, etc.) are **language-specific library registries**. Conda, on the other hand, is a **multi-language, user-space distribution** that can assemble coherent runtime and build environments across programming languages, system libraries, compilers, and tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PyPI (and npm, RubyGems, Cargo, etc.) are **language-specific library registries**. Conda, on the other hand, is a **multi-language, user-space distribution** that can assemble coherent runtime and build environments across programming languages, system libraries, compilers, and tools.
```

Reviewer: We need to be careful to not conflate pip with PyPI.

Author: https://github.com/conda/conda-dot-org/pull/250/commits/97b84ac9d425be760fb14849b5db7bfdd0035abe

(Definition) A **user-space distribution** is a curated, relocatable filesystem prefix containing interpreters, libraries, headers, data, and tooling that runs entirely without needing privileged installation into system directories. It complements—rather than replaces—the host kernel and core C library.

> This first article sets the stage by exploring the difference between **library registries** and **distributions**, and why comparing conda to pip is like comparing apples to entire orchards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This first article sets the stage by exploring the difference between **library registries** and **distributions**, and why comparing conda to pip is like comparing an entire orchard to an apple.
```

Reviewer: The ordering of the comparison should match the order conda and pip and mentioned in.

- **Solver-driven consistency.** Conda (via the SAT-based dependency solver provided by `libmamba`) ensures all dependencies—across languages, **ABIs** ([Application Binary Interface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_binary_interface)), and platforms—work together coherently (see also [Boolean satisfiability](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_satisfiability_problem)).
- **Build + runtime.** Recipes declare build/host/run phases so resulting packages accurately encode runtime and (when relevant) linked toolchain requirements.
- **Portability.** Conda packages are built against the **oldest supported `glibc`** ([GNU C Library](https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/)) or corresponding macOS/Windows baselines so they remain **forward compatible** with newer OS versions (similar in spirit to Python’s [manylinux policy](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/#manylinux)).

> Put simply: conda packages model **distribution units**, not just language-scoped libraries.

Reviewer: What is a "distribution unit"? Maybe the comparison here is to linux distros, but with a reduced scope?

Author: addressed that in https://github.com/conda/conda-dot-org/pull/250/commits/97b84ac9d425be760fb14849b5db7bfdd0035abe

authors: [dbast, jezdez]
tags: [conda, packaging, distribution]
description: "Part 1 of the 'Conda Is Not PyPI' series—why conda is a multi-language user-space distribution, not just a Python package manager."
---

*Part 1 of our series “Conda Is Not PyPI: Understanding Conda as a User-Space Distro”.*

<!-- truncate -->

---

When people first encounter conda, the most common misconception is:

> *“Isn’t conda just another Python package manager, like pip?”*

The short answer: **no**.

PyPI (and npm, RubyGems, Cargo, etc.) are **language-specific library registries**. The conda package ecosystem (installable with tools like conda, mamba, micromamba, or pixi), on the other hand, functions as a **multi-language, user-space distribution** that can assemble coherent runtime and build environments across programming languages, system libraries, compilers, and tools.

(Definition) A **user-space distribution** is a curated, relocatable filesystem prefix containing interpreters, libraries, headers, data, and tooling that runs entirely without needing privileged installation into system directories. It complements—rather than replaces—the host kernel and core C library.

> This first article sets the stage by exploring the difference between **library registries** and **distributions**, and why comparing conda to pip is like comparing an entire orchard to an apple.

Author: done

- `share/man/...` → **manpages** for CLI tools
- `ssl/` → (Sometimes) CA cert bundle + OpenSSL config
- `sbin/` → Ancillary / admin-style utilities (often sparse)

This is what “user-space distro” means in practice: **complete developer and runtime assets live inside the environment**, not scattered across `/usr`.

---

## The core distinction: libraries vs. distributions

Think of it this way:

- A **library registry** (like PyPI/npm) is about sharing **code libraries** within one programming language.
- A **distribution** (like Debian, Fedora, or conda) is about building **coherent systems of software** that interoperate reliably.

Conda environments are essentially **miniature user-space distros**, tailored to your workload. They carry everything needed for reproducible builds and executions—except for the platform’s core C library layer:

- On Linux, purposefully relies on the host’s `glibc` baseline for forward compatibility while shipping most other critical runtime components (`libstdc++`, compression libs, math libs, etc.).
- On Windows, the MSVC runtime is provided as conda packages (e.g. `vs2015_runtime`).
- On macOS, system frameworks and the platform libc are used.

> This mirrors (conceptually) Python’s manylinux wheel strategy: build against a conservative baseline so binaries function on newer systems.

Author: @msarahan thanks for that historic context and digging out that link. Updated the text to correctly reflect that.
